---
layout: post
title: "Social hash as identity"
description: "Can we derive identity from the structure of our social network?"
sharing: true
footer: true
categories: Ideas
---

(This is a "brain-dump" post).

Many write-ups and studies on social networks and privacy issues talk about the
risk of using one’s personal information disclosed within social networks for
identity theft. That made me think about whether it is really possible for an
identity thief to steal my entire social environment and history or whether
such theft is simply an indication of how broken the current paper-world
identity systems are in the digital age?

Enter the “social hash” – a short identification string that can be generated
from the data in your social network’s history that is very highly likely to be
unique to you and very difficult to duplicate in a "prove your identity"
challenge.

<!-- more -->

Let us consider a person’s "social history" (say on Facebook for simplicity,
but the same concept will also apply to google+) – i.e. The linear sequence of
events related to the establishment and termination of all my connections with
other people on the network. Each event is one of –

    joined on DATETIME at GPSLOC
    added/removed PERSON to/from CIRCLE on DATETIME at GPSLOC
    checkedin at GPSLOC on DATETIME

A stream of such events is guaranteed to be linear in time since they are all
actions taken by one person ... with no two events having the same time time
stamp even at the 1 second resolution. A strong hash of this kind of “history
string” therefore captures "me" in terms of my social network history.
Authorities needing to verify my identity can request for a “recent ID” that
they can then verify using a back channel into the social network doubling as
an identity service.

Now, what should we use in the PERSON field for an event? It seems obvious that
it has to be that person's ID hash at that particular event’s DATETIME when the
event happened. With this scheme, it seems to me that the only way an attacker
can steal your identity is to actually login as you – i.e. only by hacking into
your account. If the trusted social network and id provider (do I hear a "yeah,
right"?) uses a multiple-point verification system prior to revealing a recent
social snapshot hash of you to yourself (ex: SMS one time passcode and digipass
like banks do now), an attacker might have reasonable difficulty in producing
your ID string even if s/he has your account hacked. At each such point at
which your ID is verified successfully by an agency, a new verification event
can also be tacked on to your running hash similar to a checkin. Also, identity
verification can be conducted without actually having anyone peek into your
facebook/g+ account since they will only need to check hash equality. Existing
social networks will also be able to generate such an ID for you
retrospectively as well.

Do you think such a "social snapshot" as an ID can make identity theft
difficult? There are lots of corner cases and improvements that can be done on
the basic scheme described above, but my question is only that of viability of
the scheme.

Computing the hash at any given time would not require the whole history string
to be available. I described the hash as though it were computed on one long
string for simplicity, but we only need to compute a recursive hash – i.e. when
a new event happens, a new hash is generated by hashing together the most
recent hash and the new event record. This way, you don’t have to keep a long
running string anywhere in the social network provider’s backend.

If the provider’s user interface and APIs never reveal time information to a
sub-second accuracy and a millisecond accurate time stamp is used in the hash,
this can provide some additional difficulty in reproducing the hash as well.

(PS: My original google plus post on this is [here](https://plus.google.com/102694714835839603248/posts/b7SsJTR1GGV).)
