---
layout: post
title: "Mathemusicking"
date: 2014-06-28 11:15
comments: true
categories: 
- Mathematics
- Music
---

Recent writing in the field of ethnomusicology has re-asked the question of
"what is music?". Christopher Small coined the term ["musicking"][musicking],
which to me expresses that there is no such thing as "music" that is apart
from the act of "musicking". Music and mathematics have shared a historical
bond with each other - with mathematicians finding fascination in musical
patterns and musicians relishing in artistic construction using mathematical
patterns, more recently involving computational patterns. The relationship that
both these activities bear to the functioning of human cognition also share
great similarities. Mathematicians have long declared the activity of "doing
mathematics" as a creative process that is not steeped in certainties, as a
naive view of mathematics might suppose. Paralleling that, musicians also often
demonstrate intellectualization of the activity of musicking that resembles a
mathematical theory of the constructs that they are building. In consideration
of such deep connections, in this essay, I explore the parallel thesis - there
is no such thing as mathematics, there is only mathematicking - and where I
name the joint activity "mathemusicking".

<!-- more -->

Top physicists have long pondered the puzzle of why the laws of nature are best
expressed in the language of mathematics. This is a question that I believe
every scientist faces at some time or the other. Indeed, a younger me has been
consumed by this question over weeks, through even sleep, at one point and it
has continued to backdrop all my thinking about modern physics and mathematics,
though I'm not a professional in either field. The question's depth feels so
inaccessible that we often give it up as a "mystery" soon after we think of
that question. At least, I did. 

Now, I've adopted a point of view from which the question no longer seems
mysterious in the way it used to - unfathomable or ineffable - though it has
other mysteries to it. This point of view is that the form of mathematics - the
"language" as we call it - is inextricably bound to the laws of the universe in
which it is effected. Yes, I'd like to claim that a universe with different
physical laws would result in correspondingly different mathematics. 

If that sounds ridiculous, it may not continue to be so after we step into
human cognition for a while and look at what processes might be involved in
concept formation. [Drescher's exploration] of Piaget's schema theory of child
development in the context of an AI's development in a simulated world offers
an interesting case. He introduces an algorithm called "marginal attribution"
for an AI to learn new schemas.  In particular, he identifies a "reified
schema" as a newly created "item" in the AI's store that stands for the
consequence of a particular schema playing out its action under its context.
Having such a "reified schema" available as state is a process by which the
system is able to build abstractions about the world it inhabits.

If we ask what having such reified schemas in our cognitive system *feels
like*, I will not be surprised if it feels as through these abstractions have a
reality of their own. Indeed, the term "reified" reflects this tendency. The
same kind of computational resources are being used to model both "primitive
schemas" (those that directly relate to sensory input) and these abstract
"reified schemas". This makes it likely that our cognition would treat both
kinds of computational patterns in a similar way. This model explains why Plato
and Pythagorus were unable to escape theorizing that pure geometrical objects
inhabited their own "planes of existence".

I therefore suspect that it is entirely possible that those entities that we
regard as mathematical certainties, to which we might tend to attribute a
reality independent of the physical universe we inhabit, are such
"reifications" in our collective cognitive fabric. 

This model has several other advantages too. For one thing, such reifications
can differ among individuals, especially when in their primitive stages. What
we conventionally call mathematics extends this process to its extreme where
similar reifications are attempted to be created in all the minds that engage
in it. When Hardy and Littlewood looked at Ramanujan's letters, they found him
employing notation and drawing conclusions that they could not comprehend,
despite Ramanujan having not learnt any special form of mathematics and working
with standard textbooks alone. It took a while for the reifications in
Ramanujan's mind to travel to other minds. While Ramanujan's offers a striking
example, this is a process we all undergo on a daily basis, whether we're doing
mathematics or not.

Musicking has a parallel as well. Though, for most, music is deeply connected
with humans as "emotional beings" and a naive view of mathematics as being
emotionless does exist in the common mind, some of the most deeply experienced
music cannot rightfully be described as "emotional", in much the same way as a
mathematician might describe a "beautiful theory" and, depending on the theory,
have an equally powerful experience of ecstasy or epiphany in the act of
discovering it. In musicking, we may be said to "communicate" only when we are
able to share at least some of these reifications in our cognitive fabric.
This definitely places our conventional notion of music as a social construct,
and forces us to ask "what if mathematicking is similar too?".

Our famous works of literature, especially poetry, are rife with the "music" in
the speech of children, in the rustling of leaves, in the "rhythmic" bashing of
waves on the seashore. "Kuzhal inidu yaazh inidu enbar tammakkal mazhalaichchol
kelaadavar"  - a Tamil saying that means "Those who say that the flute or the
harp is beautiful have not heard their children's utterances". What is it that
we hear as "music" in the utterances of a child?  Our recent discoveries about
child development indicate that this same child also explores his/her world in
a scientific manner ... doing it with such command that they'd put many
professional scientists to shame. All you need to do is to watch a child learn
how to walk or pick up language, starting from birth. Children differ among
themselves in the phases that they go through, based on the affordances of
their bodies. However, the way they discover their limits incrementally is
fascinating to observe.  Could these children be said to be attempting
"mathematics to our minds" in the same sense in which we'd call their attempts
at speech "music to our ears"?

Whatever the process of "mathematicking" is, there is no escaping the fact that
it is something that entities in this physical universe do. However real a
mathematical theory might feel to us, we are, at the mercy of reified concepts
in our cognitive fabric and the way it feels to have them. 

So, how about we marry these two principles -- that there is "only musicking"
and "only mathematicking" in a simultaneous exploration of both -
"mathemusicking"? While the term could be naively interpreted as something like
"exploring music through mathematics", as though mathematics were an instrument
like a ship using which we "explore" the oceans of music, how about we think of
this as a joint activity, where neither music nor mathematics is merely an
instrument that enlightens the other, where both have their own equal standing,
where both are grounded in the body and how we use our bodies and minds to
sense our world, where, perhaps, we might allow ourselves to be confused about
whether we're musicking or mathematicking, and where we live out our lives in
the triangular space between music, mathematics and human cognition?

<img src="/images/mathemusicking.jpg" width="100%"/>

[musicking]: http://books.google.co.in/books?hl=en&lr=&id=7vS8yQwvuGcC&oi=fnd&pg=PT1&dq=christopher+small+musicking&ots=EPZB70Fi3A&sig=SEvGYaXaIb-ObVtHvk2nPj2v6WE#v=onepage&q=christopher%20small%20musicking&f=false

[Drescher's exploration]: http://books.google.co.in/books/about/Made_up_Minds.html?id=jYsEzeKHLNUC&redir_esc=y
